---
layout: post
title: SMorSe Android Application
description: "SMorSe is an android application that converts incoming SMS messages to morse code. If the phone is on normal mode, the morse code message is played at the frequency and duration set in the application settings. If the phone is set to vibrate, the morse code message is vibrated at the duration set in the application settings."
modified: 2015-07-29
tags: [android]
comments: false
image:
  feature: android/smorse.png
---
<script type="text/javascript"
  src="https://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS-MML_HTMLorMML">
</script>

## Listen to SMS Messages in Morse Code

[SMorSe](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.jacobmdavidson.smsmorsecode) is an Android application that converts incoming text messages to Morse code based on the ITU-R M.1677-1 recommendation. Simply enable the app, and all incoming text messages will be converted to Morse code (even if the app is not running). If the ringer mode is set to normal, the message is played at the frequency and speed settings chosen. If the ringer mode is set to vibrate, the message is vibrated at the speed setting chosen. Each message begins with the starting signal ( — • — • — ), after which the message is played. The cross signal ( • — • — • ) indicates the end of the message. The source code is freely available on [GitHub](https://github.com/JacobMDavidson/smsmorsecode).

#### Features:

1. If the user is on a call when the message is received, the message is not played
2. If the user receives a call when the message is playing, the message is stopped.
3. If the user changes the screen state twice while the message is playing, the playback stops immediately.
4. Application does not have to be running to receive text messages in morse code
5. If music is playing when a message is received, the music is paused during message playback and resumed after message playback completion.

## How it Works

This application is composed of three components: the main activity, a broadcast receiver, and a service. The main activity allows the user to enable the broadcast receiver and set the frequency and speed of the morse code playback. The broadcast receiver is invoked whenever a text message is received and starts the service, passing the received text message to the service. The service then converts the text message to a morse code and plays or vibrates the morse code message.

#### <u>Main Activity</u>

The main activity allows the user to enable or disable the broadcast receiver. The broadcast receiver is registered within the AndroidManifest.xml file with the SMS_RECEIVED intent filter, and is initially disabled. A toggle button in the main activity class enables and disables the broadcast receiver using the PackageManager class. This method allows the broadcast receiver to persist even when the application is closed.

The main activity also allows the user to select the frequency and speed of morse code playback. The frequency affects the pitch of the tone affecting only audible playback. The speed affects both audio and vibratory playback, and is set in "words per minute" units. The speed is based on the word "Paris" which is the traditionally selected average word length. The frequency can be set in the range of 400Hz to 1000Hz (incremented by 50Hz), and the speed setting can be set in the range of 10 WPM to 40 WPM (incremented by 10 WPM). The ranges of these settings were restricted to eliminate a glitching affect that I will elaborate on below.

Finally, the main activity allows the user to enter a string and play that string in morse code with the chosen morse code settings. Playing the string is accomplished by starting the service and passing the string to the service, effectively bypassing the broadcast receiver.

#### <u>Broadcast Receiver</u>

When a text message is received, the broadcast receiver is invoked. The broadcast receiver extracts the message body and passes it to the service, starting the service in the process. The broadcast receiver does this by creating an intent to start the service, adding the body of the text message to that intent, and finally starting the service. To ensure existing calls are not interrupted, the service is not started if an existing call is detected.

#### <u>Service</u>  

The service does the bulk of the work. The onCreate method is only called when the service is first started. If the service is already running when another intent is received, the onCreate method is not called again. The onCreate method does the following:

1. If the ringer mode is set to silent, the service is terminated.
2. A cancelation feature is implemented by creating a temporary broadcast receiver that listens for the screen turning on or off. If the screen state is changed twice (by pushing the power button twice), the service is terminated.
3. A queue of intents is instantiated that stores the intents generated from all incoming text messages to ensure no incoming messages are lost during morse code playback.
4. If the ringer mode is set to normal, the audio focus of the music stream is requested to temporarily stop music while the morse code track is played, and a MorseCodeAudioTrack is instantiated with the morse code translation of the supplied message.
5. If the ringer mode is set to vibrate a MorseCodeVibrateTrack is instantiated with the morse code translation of the supplied message.
6. The ringer mode is switched to silent while the message is played to disable any tones that may be played when a new message arrives.
7. A PhoneStateListener is instantiate that listens for a phone state change to ringing or offhook. This listener stops the morse code service if the user receives a call.

The onStart method is called each time an intent is sent to the service, and the intent is added to the message queue. If this is the initial intent that has been sent to the service, a service started flag is set to true and the getNextMessage method is called. The getNextMessage method retrieves the intent at the head of the messages queue, extracts the message body from that intent, and plays or vibrates the morse code message based on the chosen settings for frequency and speed. When the end of the message is played, the getNextMessage method is called again if there are more messages in the queue, otherwise the service is terminated.

## Converting to Morse Code

Messages are converted to morse code based on the ITU-R M.1677-1 recommendation. The converted message is a string of 1's and 0's. The 1's indicate a single unit of sound or vibration, and the 0's indicate a single unit of silence. The spacing and length of signals are as follows:

1. A dash is equal to three dots.
2. The space between the signals forming the same letter is equal to one dot.
3. The space between two letters is equal to three dots.
4. The space between two words is equal to seven dots.

For example, the word "Paris", which is the frequently chosen average word length when determining words per minute, translates to • — — •  • —  • — •  • •  • • • in morse code. Using the rules for length of signal, this word is converted to the following string of 1's and 0's: "10111011101000101110001011101000101000101010000000" (note, this string includes a space between this word and the next, represented by the seven 0's at the end). The word "Paris" is 50 units of length long.
